An Act to provide for the enhancement of livelihood security of the households in rural areas of the country by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed wage employment in every financial year to every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
TheMahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 2005(MGNREGA) was an Indiansocial welfaremeasure that aimed to guarantee the 'right to work'. This act was passed on 23 August 2005[1]and was implemented in February 2006 under theUPA governmentof Prime MinisterManmohan Singhfollowing the tabling of the bill in parliament by the Minister for Rural DevelopmentRaghuvansh Prasad Singh. The bill was originally known as theNational Rural Employment Guarantee Act(NREGA).[3]In 2025, it was repealed by theParliament of Indiaafter theLok SabhaandRajya Sabhapassed theViksit Bharat–Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin) Act(VB–G RAM G). The new legislation replaced MGNREGA with an updated rural employment and livelihood guarantee framework under theMinistry of Rural Development.[5][6][7]
It aimed to enhance livelihood security in rural areas by providing at least 100 days of assured and guaranteed wage employment in a financial year to at least one member of every Indian rural household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work.[8][9][10]Women are guaranteed one half of the jobs made available under the MGNREGA and efforts are made to ensure that cross the limit of 50%.[11]Another aim of MGNREGA is to create durable assets (such as roads, canals, ponds and wells). Employment is to be provided within 5 km of an applicant's residence, and minimum legal wage under the law is to be paid. If work is not provided within 15 days of applying, applicants are entitled to an unemployment allowance. That is, if the government fails to provide employment, it has to provide certain unemployment allowances to those people. Thus, employment under MGNREGA is a legal entitlement. Apart from providing economic security and creating rural assets, other things said to promote NREGA are that it can help inprotecting the environment,empowering rural women, reducingrural-urban migrationand fosteringsocial equity, among others."[12]
The act was first proposed in 1991 by then Prime MinisterP.V. Narasimha Rao.[13]It was finally accepted in the parliament and commenced implementation in625 districts of India. Based on this pilot